---
layout: post
title:  "Holden As An Unreliable Narrator"
date:   2021-03-04 11:10:34 +0530
categories: new test small
related_image: "/assets/catcher.jpg"
excerpt: J.D.Salinger’s The Catcher In The Rye tells the story of Holden; A young man struggling with the responsibilities and reality of growing up.
featured: 0
tags: eng-lit essay
---
![Head Image](/assets/catcher.jpg)
 J.D.Salinger’s *The Catcher In The Rye* tells the story of 
Holden; A young man struggling with the responsibilities and reality of 
growing up. The story takes place in New York City in where Holden’s 
interactions with society, as well as his observations, reveal in him 
the belief that the adult world is completely corrupt with the only 
innocence being children. However, evidence throughout the novel hints 
at the flaws in his statements. In J.D Salinger’s *The Catcher In The Rye* Holden displays his unreliability as a narrator through his unstable 
mentality and hypocritical actions which put into question the accuracy 
of Holden’s views on society.

 First of all, the most basic facts about Holden’s mentality should be 
brought to light. The most clear cut information on his instability 
comes from Holden himself. At the end of the book Holden’s admits that 
he has been admitted into a mental institution and that he has yet to be
 let out. However, even before this straightforward revelation, his 
fragile mentality was demonstrated during his walk down fifth avenue 
where he almost suffered a nervous breakdown. More subtly hidden was the
 author’s use of phrases throughout the book. Holden is quite excessive 
in his use of his catchphrases of that “killed me” and “crazy” which he 
uses to subconsciously display his inner turmoil.

 This mental unstability of Holden’s stretches deeper than the surface. 
The one event that impacted Holden’s life the most, and the one that he 
constantly refers back to is the death of his brother, Allie. Allie’s 
death is a major cause to Holden psychosis. He is traumatized by this 
event and it causes him to be burdened by guilt. As Peter Shaw stated in
 his article *Love and Death in The Catcher In The Rye* “The most
 striking double entendres, redolent both of guilt over Allie’s death 
and an attempt to fob off that guilt on someone else is a remark about 
his sister Phoebe containing the words, ‘she killed Allie, too’…. his 
unconscious understanding is that Phoebe (like himself) is somehow 
responsible for Allie’s death (Shaw 1-2)” He attempts to rub his guilt 
off on others but it still left with a sense of hatred towards himself 
as well as the people around him for his brothers death. This manifested
 in him a biased hatred towards the world that couldn’t save his beloved
 brother Allie. The trauma that Holden experienced also arose in him a 
desire for death. In the scene where Phoebe asked Holden to name 
something that he liked he had trouble thinking of an answer. Instead, 
he found his mind wandering to memories of James Castle, a student he 
had known who had committed suicide. This scene suggests that Holden 
clearly has a fascination with death. Another mentionable moment is when
 he went to visit the museum. In the tomb exhibit he stated that he 
“liked it” there and that “it was so nice and peaceful.” This 
combination of guilt and desire for death warp his views into biased 
ones. His guilt, constant throughout the story, and his desire for 
death, perhaps as punishment for Allie’s death, prohibit Holden from 
seeing the world in a positive way. His views on society are negatively 
biased and he refuses to see any good in society at the risk of moving 
on from his guilt and seeing the world through clearer eyes.

 The thing that Holden hates most in society are adults. This has much 
to do with his childhood experiences which also led to his current 
warped mentality. Holden reveals to the audience that he had a “lousy 
childhood” and that “[his] parents were occupied and all before they had
 [him].” This already suggests that growing up Holden did not have good 
experiences which made biased his views towards adults. When further 
discussing his parents Holden chooses selective information to reveal to
 the reader. He describes his parents as distant and even criticizes his
 father’s profession as a lawyer as “phony” even though there really 
isn’t anything “phony” about being a lawyer. Holden demonstrates further
 issues with his parents in that of failed affection. In the scene where
 Holden was sneaking out of his parents apartment after talking to 
Phoebe, Holden comments “I didn’t give a damn anymore if they caught 
me…I almost wished they did, in a way (Salinger).” Holden wants to be 
caught by his parents and to be comforted, however his parents fail to 
be there for him. In addition, when fooling around with Stradlater he 
comments “Mother darling everything’s getting so dark in here….mother 
darling, give me your hand, why won’t you give me your hand. 
(Salinger)”. Although he says this jokingly this statement connects 
deeper to his parental issues. The most major event during the story 
that shows Holden’s problem with childhood is during his walk down 
Broadway. Holden comments on a boy walking down the street with his 
family:

[They] were just walking along, talking, not paying attention to their 
kid… He was singing that song ‘If a body catch a body coming through the
 rye’… The cars zoomed by, brakes screeched all over the place, his 
parents paid no attention to him, and he kept on walking next to the 
curb and singing… It made me feel better. It made me feel not so 
depressed any more (Salinger).

It was this moment that inspired Holden to want to become the catcher in
 the rye after witnessing a moment so alike his own childhood through 
seemingly careless parents. He wishes that someone would come and save 
him from the perilous situation he is currently in and likewise wishes 
to do the same for other children. This moment also further fuels his 
idea that adults are bad although in truth, not all adults behave in 
that careless manner.

 A major issue when reading the story is determining whether Holden’s 
views are reliable enough to be trusted, mentality set aside. Holden’s 
views in general are simply problematic. In Susan K. Mitchell’s article *To Tell You the Truth…,* Susan
 mentions two types of perceptions. Readerly and writerly. Readerly 
refers to perceiving information in a straightforward manner while 
writerly refers to perceiving the text in a way that is deeper than the 
apparent meaning. Mitchell states that “Holden perceives reality 
readerly, seeing only the surface differences between people, not the 
underlying differences within each person (Mitchell 2-3).” Holden looks 
down on others for being phony but he doesn’t seem to realize that a 
person is more than who they appear to be. He only sees the actions of 
the people around him rather than the motive behind them. To add to his 
flawed way of thinking is his idea that children equal innocence. Just 
as Holden cannot accurately categorize all adults as corrupt he cannot 
categorize all children as innocent. This is clearly demonstrated by his
 younger sister Phoebe. Phoebe displays wisdom beyond her years. She 
sees through Holden’s false statements and even lies to her mother about
 smoking a cigarette even though it had actually been Holden. Although 
Holden fails to accurately perceive reality, his basic way of thinking 
is not necessarily wrong but rather unreliable. His way of thinking is 
different than that of socially accepted views, the like of which he 
calls “phony” and causes him to view “normal’ situations biasedly. Just 
like how thinking differently from society he is considered mad, he also
 considers society’s norms as crazy and seeing their obliviousness to it
 makes him depressed (4-2). Holden is not technically wrong but his way 
of thinking is like that of me versus everyone else. In this way, his 
way of thinking is flawed as he sees “normal” people as degrading 
because of their conforming natures. Just because Holden has different 
views on society doesn’t mean that those who disagree with them are 
phony. His way of thinking causes bias towards everyone and therefore 
makes his claims unreliable.

 To add further to proof against his reliability, is his habit to lie to
 both others and to himself. An unreliable narrator is defined as a 
narrator that does not follow the author’s norms as shown depicted 
through the novel. Holden sets the norm by repeatedly identifying 
society as phony and yet he constantly breaks this by lying to himself 
(Mitchell 2-1). Holden is often contradictory in his actions compared to
 how he says he feels. While he says that movies are phony he still goes
 to see many of them and knows them well enough to act them out. He even
 invites Ackley, a fellow student he dislikes to see one. He expresses 
his hatred for the Lunts and yet still invites Sally, an old friend who 
he has classified as phony, on a date to the Lunts. He hates “phony” 
conversations and yet has many “phony” conversations of his own. He 
clearly displays a need to be connected with people although he often 
feels dislike towards the people he surrounds himself with. His need for
 attention causes him to act against his own norms and therefore makes 
him an unreliable hypocrite. 

Aside from completely ignoring his principles, he also tends to distort 
reality and subconsciously lies. Duane Edwards, in his article *Holden As The Unreliable Narrator* mentions how “[Holden] isn’t even able to quote accurately the one line
 he heard a small boy recite; …Holden changes the word ‘meet’ to ‘catch’
 and talks about not of love(the original meaning behind the poem) but 
of potential death(falling off a cliff), he reveals his willingness to 
distort the truth by ignoring – or even changing – the facts (3-2) .” 
Holden often acts like a phony himself without even being aware of it. 
Holden also partially lies to himself when he is talking about how he 
left his fencing gear on the subway and refuses to take responsibility 
for his actions by adding at the end of his admittance that it “It 
wasn’t all my fault.” He can barely tell the difference between a lie 
and a truth at times such as on his date with Sally when he told her he 
loved her and yet stated right afterwards “It was a lie of course, but 
the thing is, I meant it when I said it.” The phrase “to tell you the 
truth” follows many of his inner statements. This leaves the reader 
wondering if this implies that he was previously lying.

 Not only does Holden lie to himself but to others as well. In one 
scene, Holden has a conversation on a train with one of his classmates 
mother. Holden first lies about his name and then tells the mother that 
her son is a great student who is quite popular while in actuality, 
Holden knows that it is a complete lie and rather the opposite is true. 
Throughout the book, Holden also attempts to seem older than his actual 
age. At one point, he calls up a girl on the phone to invite her out. He
 deepens his voice in order to try to sound older than he actually is 
and later also admits that he looks older than his actual age and he 
uses this in order to try to get drinks even though he is underage. He 
even lied to his sister Phoebe about getting kicked out of school in 
order to avoid upsetting her. This is not the only time he acted falsely
 in order to gain the favor of others however, even if it’s the 
attention of people he dislikes. He straight out admits that “I’m the 
most terrific liar you ever saw in your life (Salinger 5-3).”

 Overall, Holden is an unreliable narrator through his unstable 
mentality caused by childhood issues and Allies death as well as through
 his hypocritical actions, lies, and problematic views. Although Holden 
seems to be telling the truth, what he believes to be true is not 
necessarily true. When reading J.D Salinger’s, *The Catcher In The Rye,* one has to be careful to determine the accuracy of  Holden statements 
as many of his points, although seeming logically sound, are actually 
quite irrational.